---
layout: post
title: CS 245 - Logic and Computation
date: 2016-05-02 18:56:00 -0400
categories: notes
--- 

    CS 245 - Logic and Computation
    Instructor: Collin Roberts
    Section: 003
    Location: MC 2034
    Time: Tuesdays and Thursdays 1:00pm - 2:20pm
    Tutorials: MC 2035 Fridays 8:30am - 9:20am
    Term: Spring 2016
    

May 3, 2016 - Lecture 1
-----------------------

Section 003  
Email: cd2rober@uwaterloo.ca  
Office: DC 2128

CS 245 -> Formal Logic

1) Propositional  
2) Predicate (aka First-Order) <= THE REAL GOAL

Crowdmark for assignments.  
Assignments DUE AT 12:00 ON WEDNESDAYS  
Recommended Text: Logic in Computer Science, 2nd Ed. by Huth and Ryan

Learn: Course Outline, Notes, Additional Notes - Roberts  
Refer to the Course Schedule

**Grading Scheme**

+ Assignments (10 in total, best 9 out of 10) - 20%  
+ Midterm (4:30pm - 6:20pm, June 9, 2016) - 35 %  
+ Final - 45%

Week 1: Introduction, Basic examples, formal syntax and semantics, and properties via induction.  
Reading: HR 1.1, 1.3, 1.4.2, Slides to p51

## Propositional Logic ##

LOGIC = systematic study of the principles of reasoning and inference

+ To model the computer hardware, software, and embedded systems we create/encounter, in order to reason about those objects in a rigorous manner
+ To understand how to develop systems that can themselves apply reason and make inferences (AI)
+ To define a computer required logic (Turing 1936)
+ CS gave the first definition of "rigorous argument" (an argument that may be checked by a machine; machine returns true if proof is correct)

**Example:** If the train arrives late and there are no taxis at the station, then John is late for his meeting.

John is not late for his meeting.

The train did arrive late.

__Therefore__, there were taxis at the station.

Q: Is this argument __valid__? Why/Why not?

Q: What is the structure of this argument?  
A: If p and not q, then r. Not r. p. Therefore q.

p = "the train arrives late"  
q = "there are taxis at the station"  
r = "John is late for his meeting"  

What if we reassign meanings to p, q, and r? We will get an equally valid argument.

The factual content of statements (p, q, r) doesn't matter. The relationships among the statements govern the argument.

So what constitutes a "statement"?  
What do logical relationships mean?

We shall start with **Propositional Logic**, a basic form of logic.

A **proposition** is a declarative sentence that is either **true** or **false**.

Either the proposition is true, or the proposition is false. It is never both true and false.

e.g. If Kathleen Wynne is a Liberal, then Stephen Harper is a Tory.

p->q: If p then q; p is sufficient for q, q is necessary for p.

p <-> q: p if and only if q (p iff q); p is equivalent to q; p exactly if q; p is necessary and sufficient for q.

**Translating from English to propositional logic examples:**

1. She is clever and hard-working  
Let p be "she is clever" and q be "she is hard-working"  
Then we get (p ^ q)

2. If he does not study hard then he will fail  
Let p be "he studies hard" and q be "he will fail"  
Then we get ((NOT p) -> q)

3. If it rains, he will be at home; otherwsie he will go to the market or to school.  
Let p be "it rains", q be "he will be at home", r be "he will go to the market", s be "he will go to school"  
Then we get ((p -> q) ^ ((NOT p) -> (r v s)))

Some sentences are not propositions:

+ interrogative: where shall we go to eat?
+ imperative: please pass the salt
+ ambiguous: time flies like an arrow
+ nonsense: uwgod
+ otherwise problematic: This sentence is false

<br />

May 5, 2016
---

**Administrivia**

+ A01 posted, due May 11  
+ A01 study exercises posted on Learn. Not to be handed in, extra practice  
+ Course staff office hours posted on Learn  

**Goals for Today**

+ Up to Slide 50, at least up to truth tables
+ Syntax - Propositional  
+ Semantics - Propositional

**Atomic and Compound Propositions**

In propositional logic, simple **atomic** propositions are the basic building blocks. We connect atomic propositions into **compound** propositions, and then analyze sets of interrelated propositions. Typical questions:  

+ Does a given sequence of propositions form a valid argument?  
+ Can all propositions in a given set be true simultaneously?

First, we must answer the Q: What is a proposition?  
Propositions are represented by **formulas**. A formula consists of a sequence of **symbols**. There are 3 kinds of symbols:

+ Propositional variables: usually lower case Latin  letters (e.g. p, q, r) perhaps with subscripts  
+ Connectives: We shall use negation, ^(and), v(or), -> and <-> (Others are possible)  
+ Punctuation: Only two, ( and ) (we could avoid them)

Every formula is a sequence of symbols, but not every sequence of symbols is a formula. We call an arbitrary finite sequence of symbols an **expression** (or **string**)

An expression is a finite sequence of symbols. The **length** of an expression is its number of symbols. We often use a letter that is not formally a symbol in order to name an expression. For example, alpha. This is an example of a "meta-symbol".

**Some terminology for expressions**

Two expressions a and b are **equal** written as a=b, iff they are of the same length, say n, and if n>0, 

Let P be a set of propositional variables. We define the set of formulas over P inductively as follows.

1. An expression consisting of a single symbol of P is a formula  
2. If phi is a formula, then the negation of phi is a formula  
3. If phi is a formula and eta is a formula, then each of (phi and eta), (phi or eta), (phi -> eta), and (phi <-> eta) is a formula
4. Nothing else is a formula

(Note the use of meta-symbols phi and eta)

The following are well-formed formulas.

1. p,q,r,s (rule 1)
2. (not p) (rule 2, from #1)
3. (r ^ q) (rule 3, from #1)
4. ((not p) -> s) (rule 3, from #2 and #1)
5. ((r ^ q) v ((not p) -> s)) (rule 3, from #3 and #4)
6. (not (r ^ q)) (rule 2, from #3)

From the definition, we see that there are six kinds of formulas:

+ A propositional variable = ATOM 
+ A formula (not phi) = NEGATION
+ A formula (phi ^ eta) = CONJUNCTION
+ A formula (phi v eta) = DISJUNCTION
+ A formula (phi -> eta) = IMPLICATION
+ A formula (phi <-> eta) = EQUIVALENCE

Q: Can a formula have two or more kinds? No.

<br />

**Semantics of Propositional Logic**

The **semantics** of a logic describes how to interpret the well-formed formulas of the logic. The semantics of propositional logic is "compositional": the meaning of a whole formula derives from the meaning of its parts. In propositional logic, we need to give meaning to atoms, connectives, and formulae. For example, the interpretation of the formula (p ^ q) depends on three things, the meaning of p, the meaning of q, and the meaning of ^.

Definition: A **truth evaluation** is a function (P -> {T, F}) with the set of all proposition symbols as domain and {F, T} as range. A truth eval assigns a value to every propositional variable. If t(p) = T, then we say "t makes p true", if t(p) = F, then we say "t makes p false". A propositional variable has no intrinsic meaning. It gets a meaning only via an evaluation.

-> : "Truth is Preserved"

May 6, 2016 - Tutorial 1
---

A few exercises of truth tables, translations, and structural induction:

